###########
 Confucius
###########

Confucius (551–479 BCE) was a Chinese philosopher, teacher, and
political thinker whose ideas shaped Chinese civilization and much of
East Asia. Born in the state of Lu (modern-day Shandong province),
Confucius devoted his life to teaching moral cultivation, proper
governance, and social harmony.

Although he never wrote books himself, his disciples compiled his
teachings in the Analects, completed after his death around the 5th–4th
century BCE. Other works associated with the Confucian tradition, such
as the Book of Rites, Doctrine of the Mean, and Great Learning, further
systematized his ethical vision.

Between 206 BCE and 220 CE, Confucianism is established as state
philosophy, embedding his ethics in law and education.

#########
 Harmony
#########

Confucius provides an account of the ethical traditions of his time,
describing how behavior commonly understood as moral contributed to
positive outcomes such as social stability, balance, and cooperative
relationships.

The concept of He (harmony) was originally associated with harmony in
music. Confucius elevates this idea to the social sphere, teaching that
true harmony is not uniformity. It does not mean that everyone produces
the same sound; rather, diversity contributes to a greater whole, where
all parts combine effectively. However, achieving such societal harmony
requires that both citizens and rulers display virtuous moral behavior.

Harmony depends on avoiding extremes in conduct and practicing proper
emotional regulation. A noble person should not be considered noble
merely by birth, but by exhibiting moral excellence. In his teachings,
Confucius redefines the Junzi (traditionally a noble person by birth) to
include this moral dimension. The Junzi serves as a role model for
others, encouraging widespread ethical behavior.

###############
 Righteousness
###############

One key characteristic of moral behavior in Confucian ethics is Yi
(righteousness or integrity). Yi is the disposition to prioritize moral
duty over personal gain.

Some concrete expressions of righteousness include:

-  Choosing ethical action even if it brings no material gain or
   involves personal inconvenience.
-  Correcting others courageously, but with respect and consideration.
-  Advising rulers against unjust policies.
-  Treating subjects fairly, avoiding favoritism, and enforcing justice
   impartially.

#############
 Benevolence
#############

The second key characteristic of moral behavior in Confucian ethics is
Ren (humaneness or benevolence). Ren is the disposition to show care,
compassion, and goodwill toward others.

Some concrete expressions of benevolence include:

-  Showing empathy in daily interactions through attentive listening and
   careful speech.
-  Practicing self-control, especially over anger, to prevent harm to
   others.
-  Acting with sincerity in friendships and diligence in carrying out
   responsibilities.
-  Correcting mistakes gently, in ways that preserve the dignity of the
   person being corrected.
-  Respecting the silver rule: “Do not impose on others what you
   yourself do not desire.”

#########
 Rituals
#########

Cultivating benevolence and righteousness is possible only through the
consistent practice of Li (rituals), which teach, reinforce, and embody
these dispositions.

Confucius illustrates the moral and social function of ritual through a
wide range of traditions and practices:

-  **Sacrifices to Heaven and Earth:** Rulers performed elaborate rites
   to uphold cosmic harmony and political legitimacy. These ceremonies
   cultivated humility and gratitude, reminding rulers of their
   dependence on Heaven and their duty to govern justly in service of
   the people.

-  **Court ceremonies:** Formalized greetings, banquets, and
   hierarchical protocols in dealings with superiors or envoys fostered
   respect and restraint. Such practices trained officials to honor the
   dignity of others and promoted fairness by treating people according
   to their role.

-  **Investiture and appointment rites:** Rituals for granting office,
   receiving mandates, or bestowing titles emphasized that political
   authority is a responsibility an office held in service to the
   people.

-  **Filial piety rituals:** Daily gestures of respect toward parents,
   such as greetings, service, and deference. These practices train
   individuals to see the well-being of others, beginning with family,
   as inseparable from their own, laying the groundwork for extending
   kindness outward into society.

-  **Ancestral offerings:** Food, incense, and libations offered to
   deceased relatives. The ritual fosters a sense of shared humanity
   across time, encouraging gratitude and a compassionate recognition of
   how one’s life depends on others, both living and departed.

-  **Funerary and mourning rituals:** Extended mourning periods,
   specific garments, and regulated expressions of grief. These
   practices refine the capacity to feel deeply with others. Benevolence
   here takes shape as genuine solidarity in sorrow, strengthening bonds
   of compassion within the community

-  **Marriage rites:** A multi-step process of betrothal, dowry
   exchange, and ceremonial union. By binding households together,
   marriage rites teach benevolence as a commitment to shared life,
   where fidelity and fairness in intimate relationships become the
   basis for harmony in society.

-  **Seasonal sacrifices:** Spring and autumn ceremonies marking
   planting and harvest. These ceremonies cultivate benevolence by
   fostering gratitude for shared sustenance and reinforcing the duty to
   care for others, since survival and flourishing are never individual
   achievements but collective ones.

-  **Offerings to spirits of mountains and rivers:** Rites honoring
   local deities and natural forces. These rites teach respect for the
   environment as a partner in human life, awakening compassion that
   reaches beyond social bonds to embrace the broader harmony of
   creation.

-  **Forms of greeting:** Bows, gestures, and respectful language
   appropriate to status. They teach attentiveness and respect in even
   the smallest interactions, cultivating the habit of recognizing the
   worth of every person.

-  **Banquet etiquette:** Rules of seating, order of serving, and
   conduct at communal meals. They foster generosity and fairness,
   reminding participants that communal enjoyment depends on disciplined
   attention to the needs of all.

-  **Dress codes:** Prescribed clothing by rank, season, and occasion.
   By learning to dress in harmony with time, place, and role,
   individuals are taught to practice self-restraint and to express care
   for the social fabric.

-  **Speech etiquette:** Modesty and careful phrasing in daily
   conversation. By adopting the practice, people learn to balance
   honesty with kindness.

#############
 Filial pity
#############

Xiao (filial piety) is the affection, respect, and reverence that
children nurture toward their parents. It provides the emotional
foundation for following parental guidance and observing family rituals.
Filial piety is cultivated and expressed through ritual practice, and
the disposition formed within the family extends outward into society,
shaping relationships of respect and harmony in the wider world.

At the same time, filial piety does not mean blind obedience. Genuine
respect requires sincerity but also discernment. If parents act wrongly,
a filial child should remonstrate gently, offering correction with
humility. Yet if the advice is not accepted, the child neither insists
nor rebels, but continues to show respect and refrains from open
opposition.

##################
 Self-cultivation
##################

Xiūshēn (self-cultivation) is the ongoing effort to refine one’s moral
character through reflection, learning, and disciplined practice. It
develops the inner capacities necessary for ethical living. Through
self-cultivation, an individual internalizes filial piety toward
parents, recognizes the importance of rituals and observes them
sincerely, strengthens the practice of humaneness, and cultivates the
resolve to follow righteousness.

Confucius provides several concrete practices to cultivate oneself:

-  **Reflection on actions and motives:** Regularly examine one’s own
   behavior to identify moral shortcomings and opportunities for
   improvement.

-  **Lifelong learning:** Study the classics, observe virtuous models,
   and seek guidance from teachers and elders.

-  **Observing rituals:** Use rituals as opportunities to practice
   respect, propriety, and attentiveness.

####################
 Circle of morality
####################

According to Confucius, filial piety and ritual observance are among a
person’s foremost obligations. An individual must honor their parents
and show respect through proper etiquette. At the same time, Confucius
emphasizes the importance of role models. When parents respect their
elders and uphold ritual practices, children naturally learn through the
lived experience of family life. Likewise, when rulers and elders embody
these practices, they provide others with the opportunity to learn.
Through repeated practice and social interaction, people gradually come
to grasp the deeper meaning of these rituals, and practice itself is
transformed into internalized benevolence and integrity.

Thus, Confucian ethics can be understood as an ethics of tradition.
People acquire traditions through their lived experience within society,
and they carry a moral obligation to uphold them. Over time, through
self-cultivation and practice, they come to recognize that the
traditions themselves embody universal principles of morality.

############################
 Confucius moral guidelines
############################

-  **Be filial:** Care for parents’ well-being (health, emotional
   support). Spend regular time with family and show appreciation for
   their efforts. Uphold family traditions and remember ancestors.

-  **Follow rituals:** Observe social etiquette: politeness, greetings,
   gratitude. Take part in meaningful family or community rituals
   (festivals, ceremonies). Show respect in professional and public
   settings (e.g., attentive listening, appropriate dress, banquet
   etiquette).

-  **Practice Benevolence:** Listen actively and try to understand
   others’ feelings. Offer help to those in need, even in small ways
   (sharing, comforting, volunteering). Avoid harsh speech; use words
   that encourage.

-  **Follow the silver rule:** Before acting, ask yourself: Would I want
   this done to me? Refrain from gossip, exploitation, or unfair
   criticism. Show consideration in daily interactions (e.g., giving
   others space, respecting their time).

-  **Be righteous:** Choose fairness over convenience or profit. Speak
   up when witnessing injustice, even if it’s unpopular, but remain
   respectful to parents and elders. Avoid compromising integrity for
   personal advantage.

-  **Cultivate virtues:** Seek knowledge and wisdom through study and
   reflection. Acknowledge mistakes and learn from them.

-  **Seek harmony:** Accept diversity, work toward solutions that
   benefit all, not just yourself. Avoid unnecessary conflicts; when
   disagreements arise, seek respectful dialogue. Balance personal needs
   with the well-being of the group.

-  **Lead by virtue:** If in a leadership role, be transparent, fair,
   and compassionate. Set an example by embodying the values you expect
   from others.
