####################
 Circle of morality
####################

************
 The circle
************

We propose that all significant advances in morality occur through a
virtuous cycle involving three interconnected elements:

-  Situated experience
-  Traditions
-  Universal theories

**Situated experience** refers to how we behave in the moment, guided by
our emotional responses, sense of right and wrong, interpersonal
interactions, personal memories, and even our evolutionary instincts.
These moment-to-moment reactions form the foundation of our moral
awareness. When our instincts are conditioned to respond morally,
ethical behavior starts to feel natural and intuitive.

**Traditions** encompass the shared practices and customs that
communities develop over time to promote harmonious living. These
include rituals, ceremonies, and codes of conduct that help individuals
coexist respectfully and meaningfully. Traditions serve as a bridge
between generations, offering a practical and emotionally resonant way
to transmit moral values until they become second nature.

**Universal theories** are the rational frameworks that articulate and
justify moral principles. These theories help explain and validate
behaviors or feelings that might initially seem unfamiliar or even
irrational to outsiders. Once understood, however, these theories make
such behaviors appear logical and consistent. By abstracting morality
into general principles, universal theories allow for broader
application across different contexts and cultures. They help align
individual and communal behaviors with values that can be widely
accepted and embraced.

Together, these three elements reinforce each other: lived experience
informs tradition, tradition gives context to theory, and theory
reshapes both experience and tradition. This ongoing interplay drives
the evolution of moral understanding across societies.

********************
 A path of progress
********************

The positive cycle of moral development follows this direction:
**situated experience → traditions → universal theories → situated
experience** and then the cycle continues.

**When our situated experiences lead to positive outcomes** in our
interactions with others, we tend to repeat them. Over time, these
behaviors become habitual, reinforcing our sense of what is right or
appropriate. As others adopt and mimic these behaviors, they begin to
solidify into shared practices that are passed down through generations.
Eventually, they evolve into traditions, often with their original
context forgotten.

**When traditions consistently contribute to the well-being** and
cohesion of a community, people begin to reflect on why they are
effective. It seems unlikely to be mere coincidence—there must be a
deeper principle at work, a moral law that applies universally. However,
not everyone accepts traditions uncritically. Some individuals may feel
constrained by them and begin to question their value or relevance. In
response, those who have witnessed the positive impact of these
traditions feel compelled to justify them using rational arguments. This
leads to the formulation of universal theories—systematic moral
principles intended to apply broadly, beyond the context of any single
community.

**When universal theories prove useful** and successfully encourage
moral behavior across various situations, they gain credibility.
However, there is a danger in over-relying on them. These theories, no
matter how elegant or far-reaching, are still just frameworks—and they
may not apply perfectly to every situation. Eventually, people return to
situated experience to test whether the theories remain valid in real
life. When discrepancies or exceptions arise, lived experience takes
precedence. If a particular behavior leads to a good outcome, even if it
contradicts the theory, people may continue to follow it regardless.

From there, the process begins anew: the successful experience may
become a new tradition, and over time, that tradition might inspire a
revised or expanded universal theory, which is then tested again in
real-world situations. As new exceptions emerge and are integrated,
moral understanding continues to evolve—refining itself and rising to
higher levels of insight.

*******************
 A path of regress
*******************

However, when the moral **cycle is inverted**, morality begins to
degenerate, leading to lower levels of ethical awareness and social
cohesion.

**When universal laws are imposed** from the top down to dictate
tradition, traditions lose their organic connection to the people who
once lived and valued them. Instead of being appreciated, they become
rigid prescriptions that feel alien or oppressive—especially to those
who were never given the chance to understand their deeper meaning. The
authentic, community-driven traditions that once fostered belonging and
purpose are lost, replaced by a sense of helplessness and disconnection.

**When traditions dictate situated experiences**, they suppress the
natural emotions of empathy, compassion, and care—emotions that form the
foundation of a thriving moral community. People follow rules
mechanically, without experiencing the emotional benefits those
traditions once nurtured. As a result, tradition is no longer seen as
something meaningful, but as a burden. Resentment grows, and the hope of
eventually abandoning or escaping these traditions begins to take root.

**When situated experiences are used to define universal laws**, moral
reasoning becomes fragmented and inconsistent. Decisions are guided by
immediate gratification or what feels right for the individual, rather
than by a broader concern for others. The "circle of care" shrinks,
limited only to those with whom one shares direct positive experiences.
Those outside this narrow circle are neglected, excluded, or even seen
as morally irrelevant.

Once the circle of care contracts, we risk imposing narrow, emotionally
disconnected universal laws on future generations. These laws, in turn,
shape rigid traditions that new generations are expected to follow
without question or understanding. This leads to a feeling of rebellion
and alienation, driving people to seek meaning in smaller, more insular
communities where they can rediscover positive situated experiences.

In such a fragmented moral landscape, shared values erode, and mutual
understanding becomes difficult. As different groups follow incompatible
traditions and disconnected universal theories, society becomes
increasingly divided. Morality, instead of being a shared journey toward
greater empathy and justice, splinters—and its unifying power is lost.
