##############
 Introduction
##############

*********************
 Aristotle's virtues
*********************

Here we use Aristotle’s definition. Virtues are **stable character
traits** developed through practice and reflection, manifested as a
disposition to behave in the "right way". In brief, the “right way” is
what helps both a person and their community to flourish, while the
“wrong way” is what harms or diminishes them.

Stages of virtue
================

Aristotle recognizes that people do not start off virtuous but progress
toward it in stages. This progress depends on one’s habits, desires, and
rational capacity. Below are the four main stages he outlines.

-  The **incontinent** person knows what is right, but oftentimes lacks
   the will to act accordingly. Occasionally, they are ruled by desire
   rather than reason. This internal conflict leads to regret and
   self-reproach after acting against better judgment.

-  The **continent** person also experiences conflicting desires, but
   unlike the incontinent, they are able to resist temptation and do the
   right thing. Their rational part wins over their appetites, though
   the struggle remains.

-  The **virtuous** person not only does the right thing but also
   desires to do so. There is harmony between reason and emotion. Their
   character is fully developed, and virtuous action is effortless and
   joyful.

-  This **divine** level refers to individuals whose virtue exceeds
   ordinary human standards. Their entire self is dedicated to the
   fulfillment of the virtue.

********************************
 Divine virtue and human limits
********************************

Here, we make the claim that Aristotle’s highest level of virtue divine
lies beyond ordinary human capacity. It implies complete, unbroken
dedication to moral excellence without regard for bodily needs or
personal well‑being.

Godlike virtue is not attainable because:

-  **Human Nature**: We are composite beings of body and soul. Our
   survival depends on rest, food, and social bonds. Total
   self‑sacrifice to virtue ignores these necessities.

-  **Finite Resources**: Time and energy are limited. Pursuing
   uninterrupted virtuous action would exhaust our physical and mental
   capacities.

-  **Emotional Balance**: Emotions signal needs—hunger, fatigue,
   grief—that require attention. Suppressing these signals undermines
   health and rational judgment.

-  **Practical Wisdom**: *Phronesis* demands moderation. True wisdom
   recognizes when to pause, reflect, and replenish one’s own capacities
   before acting again.

*******
 Vices
*******

Here we describe four stages of moral decline as mirror of Aristotle's
virtue theory. Each stage reflects a deeper entrenchment in wrongdoing
and a weakening of one’s moral character.

-  The **incontinent** vice knows that doing wrong would be advantageous
   in the moment, but oftentimes lacks the will to act on that impulse.
   Occasionally, they remain bound by custom or fear, despite perceiving
   the “benefit” of vice.

-  The **continent** vice feels conflicting desires but consistently
   resists doing good, opting instead for wrongdoing. Their self-control
   is applied to secure vice without obvious risk.

-  The **vicious** person not only performs vicious acts but genuinely
   desires them. Vice has become their second nature; they take pleasure
   in violating moral norms.

-  At this pinnacle of vice, the **devil** exceeds ordinary human
   capacity. Their entire self is dedicated to the fulfillment of the
   vice.

*************************************
 Vices as self-preservation emotions
*************************************

In common usage, **a vice is often confused with the emotion that
triggers it**. Yet the emotion itself is not the vice; it serves as a
signal, alerting us to unmet needs, perceived disparities, or
unfulfilled aspirations. What determines whether a vice is present is
how we respond to that emotion. A vice arises when the response takes
the form of deliberate hostility or destructive action aimed solely at
self-preservation, without regard for others. When managed wisely,
however, the same emotion can be redirected into reflection, dialogue,
and constructive striving, becoming a catalyst for growth rather than
harm.

As Aristotle observed, emotions are not inherently virtuous or vicious;
rather, their moral character depends on how they are expressed and
acted upon. For him, virtue lies in moderation, neither indulging
excessively in an emotion nor suppressing it entirely, but finding its
proper measure in relation to the situation. This balance requires
phronesis, or **practical wisdom**, the capacity to discern the right
response at the right time for the right reasons. In this sense, the
benefits of emotions, even those traditionally associated with vice, can
be realized when they are guided by reason and directed toward the
common good.

*******************************
 Emotions of virtues and vices
*******************************

Virtuous person
===============

Aristotle’s account of virtue emphasizes that being virtuous is not
merely about performing the right actions, but also about cultivating
the right internal states, what a person feels, desires, and is
motivated by.

-  A virtuous person takes genuine pleasure in doing what is good. This
   pleasure is a natural, meaningful joy that arises from engaging in
   virtuous activity. Doing the right thing feels rewarding in itself.

-  Virtue is marked by an internal harmony between reason and emotion.
   In a truly virtuous person, desires and feelings align with rational
   judgment. Their emotions support rather than resist moral reasoning,
   creating psychological unity and moral clarity.

-  A virtuous person flourishes within a community. Compassion and
   empathy are not distractions but essential guides to moral conduct.
   Their behavior is not only beneficial to themselves but also
   contributes positively to the well-being of others. They derive deep
   moral satisfaction from the good they do for their community.

-  A virtuous person possesses a well-grounded sense of self-respect
   regarding their moral character. They are humbly aware of their
   achievements, grateful to the community that helped shape them, and
   remain steadfast in the face of fear or adversity. Their moral
   convictions give them the courage to act with integrity, even under
   pressure.

Continent person
================

A continent individual consistently does what is right despite inner
conflict. Their moral life is shaped by a clear understanding of the
good, coupled with an ongoing struggle to resist contrary desires.

-  A continent person deliberately chooses to act virtuously, motivated
   by a sincere belief that doing good benefits both themselves and the
   community they are part of. Their moral actions require effort and
   conscious commitment.

-  Unlike the fully virtuous person, the continent individual
   experiences internal conflict. Temptations toward vice remain
   appealing, but their deeper commitment to the good gives them the
   strength to resist. Their moral choices are victories of will over
   desire.

-  The continent person finds moral grounding in the community.
   Compassion and empathy serve as essential reference points against
   which they evaluate their impulses. Although their behavior
   contributes to the common good, they may sometimes reflect with
   uncertainty, wondering if their self-restraint is excessive or
   isolating.

-  They maintain a sense of self-respect for their moral integrity,
   recognizing the strength it takes to do what is right in the face of
   inner resistance. However, they are more prone to doubt than the
   fully virtuous person, especially when facing fear, uncertainty, or
   threats to their moral stance.

Incontinent person
==================

An incontinent individual lives in a state of emotional tension and
moral instability. They are caught between a clear understanding of the
good and a recurring tendency to give in to opposing impulses. This
conflict creates a painful cycle of desire, weakness, and regret.

-  An incontinent person recognizes what is good and often wants to act
   accordingly. In the absence of strong temptations or external
   stimuli, they are capable of doing the right thing. However, their
   moral convictions are not deeply rooted, and they are vulnerable to
   lapses. When temptation arises, they may yield, even against their
   better judgment.

-  The emotional life of the incontinent person is marked by internal
   conflict. The appeal of vice remains. Their will to do good is
   present but not dominant, and they frequently succumb to temptation.
   While they may feel momentary satisfaction from the vicious act, this
   is quickly followed by regret and a renewed resolve to do better in
   the future.

-  In a community setting, the incontinent persons are receptive to
   compassion and empathy, which can help guide them toward the good.
   They understand the social value of virtuous behavior and often
   aspire to be better for the sake of the community. Yet, they also
   experience shame and remorse for not living up to these ideals more
   consistently.

-  Their self-perception is conflicted. They may feel some pride in
   their intentions, but this is undermined by frustration over their
   repeated failures. When confronted with fear or danger, they are more
   likely than the continent or virtuous person to abandon their moral
   commitments.

Incontinent vicious person
==========================

An incontinent‑vicious individual experiences a conflicted emotional
life. They are pulled between selfish inclinations and a reluctant
recognition of the good. Their behavior is shaped by ambivalence and
unstable desires.

-  The incontinent‑vicious person understands what is good for the
   community, but their primary motivation is self-interest. Left to
   their own devices, they tend to follow their selfish impulses.
   However, these desires are not strong or consistent enough to
   completely override social expectations, and they conform to virtuous
   behavior under the influence or pressure of the community.

-  The incontinent-vicious persons see some value in virtuous action,
   but their desire to prioritize their own gratification often
   dominates. Paradoxically, they may feel temporary relief or
   satisfaction after doing something morally right, yet regret not
   having seized the opportunity to indulge their vicious desires. For
   them, acting virtuously can feel like a missed chance for personal
   gain.

-  In the presence of others, they may behave better. Compassion and
   empathy, although weaker in them, are not entirely absent and can
   still influence their actions when they are part of a community. They
   recognize that virtuous behavior benefits society, but they aspire to
   it less often, focusing more on what serves their individual
   interests.

-  Their self-image is conflicted. They are neither fully comfortable
   with their selfishness nor fully committed to the good. When placed
   under community scrutiny or moral pressure, they may abandon harmful
   desires and conform to expected standards.

Continent vicious person
========================

A continent‑vicious individual exercises strong self-control to better
pursue vicious goals.

-  The continent‑vicious person deliberately chooses actions that serve
   their own advantage, guided by a belief that self-interest should
   come first. Their effort and discipline are directed toward
   maximizing personal gain, even if at the expense of others.

-  Their inner life reflects a subtle moral conflict. They recognize
   that virtuous behavior has practical benefits, such as gaining trust
   or integrating smoothly into a community. However, their stronger
   commitment to self-serving ends overrides these considerations. The
   idea of doing good is acknowledged, but consistently pushed aside in
   favor of their own benefit.

-  In a community setting, they may thrive socially, but they do no
   refrain from manipulating or exploiting others. Traits like
   compassion and empathy might be twisted into tools for control. At
   times, they may experience moments of doubt or emotional clarity,
   brief reflections on whether they’ve gone too far or if they should
   rein themselves in.

-  A continent‑vicious person often has high self-regard, viewing their
   self-discipline and cunning as strengths. However, when faced with
   intense moral pressure from a principled community, they may
   experience cracks in their confidence. Their certainty in their path
   can falter when confronted by sincere ethical challenge.

Vicious person
==============

A vicious individual experiences emotions that not only justify, but
often celebrate vicious behavior. Their emotional world is shaped by a
deep internal alignment with vice and a conscious rejection of virtue.

-  A vicious person takes genuine pleasure in doing what is wrong. This
   is a sustained satisfaction in selfish actions. For them vice is a
   source of affirmation and identity.

-  Vice involves a kind of internal harmony between reason and emotion,
   albeit oriented toward the wrong ends. There is no inner conflict;
   rather, their feelings and rational thoughts work together to pursue
   vicious goals. Their desires do not resist their reasoning, and their
   reasoning fully supports their desires.

-  In a community setting, a vicious person may thrive if they are able
   to exploit others. Traits like compassion and empathy are viewed not
   as moral guides, but as tools for manipulation. Their behavior is
   entirely self-serving, and they often rationalize their actions as
   strategic cleverness or necessary for survival, dismissing moral
   values as naive or weak.

-  A vicious person tends to maintain an exaggerated sense of
   self-worth, believing in the superiority of their worldview. They may
   feel bitterness or contempt toward those who oppose or challenge
   them, and they remain unapologetically confident in their wrongdoing,
   even when it causes clear harm to others. Even if they are ultimately
   held accountable, they may justify or defend their actions, viewing
   consequences as the cost of living on their own terms.

*******************
 Evolution in life
*******************

We are not born inherently virtuous or vicious. Rather, we come into the
world equipped with two fundamental instincts: the instinct for
self-preservation and the instinct for empathy. These are not moral
attributes in themselves, but the foundational drives that shape our
moral development. Self-preservation tends to pull us toward vice, while
empathy draws us toward virtue.

The instinct for self-preservation urges us to prioritize our own
survival and well-being. It compels us to fulfill our immediate
needs—food, warmth, safety, companionship—and to seize opportunities
that benefit us. But it also grants us the foresight to consider
long-term consequences and to make plans that secure our future.
Self-preservation is not inherently selfish; it is the primal voice of
hunger, of cold, of loneliness, reminding us to protect ourselves at all
costs.

The instinct for empathy, on the other hand, draws our attention
outward. It enables us to perceive the emotions of others and to
internalize those feelings, if only partially. As we observe those
around us, also driven by their own instinct for self-preservation,
empathy teaches us to care about their well-being. It places natural
boundaries on our actions and encourages us to consider the needs and
dignity of others. Empathy fosters cooperation and community, and like
self-preservation, it allows us to think beyond the present—only this
time, with a vision that includes others. It asks: how can we protect
and sustain not just ourselves, but everyone?

Ultimately, whether we lean toward vice or virtue depends on what we
learn from those around us. If we grow up in environments that encourage
and reward empathetic, ethical behavior, we find comfort in our
connection to others. We begin our journey toward virtue—perhaps first
as the incontinent who struggle, but aspire to do good, gradually
seeking wisdom. However, if our communities discourage empathy or punish
our attempts at kindness, we may retreat into self-preservation. We
build walls instead of bridges, and this path can lead us toward vice.

In the end, we are shaped by both our instincts and our experiences. Our
moral direction is not fixed at birth but forged through the interplay
of what we are given and what we are taught.

The path to virtue
==================

When we are fortunate enough to grow up within a supportive and
nurturing community, we are introduced to the values and principles that
shape virtuous living. In such an environment, we begin our moral
journey from a state of incontinent virtue. At this stage, we understand
what is right and recognize the impact our actions have on others.
However, the powerful emotions rooted in our instinct for
self-preservation can still lead us to make poor choices, even when we
know better.

Through lived experience, by seeing the real consequences of our
actions, we gradually learn to exercise greater control over our
impulses. As we develop emotional regulation and moral discipline, we
transition into a state of continent virtue. Here, virtuous behavior
becomes more consistent and intentional, even when it may conflict with
our immediate desires.

This growth is not achieved in isolation. A supportive community
continues to play a critical role, as do guiding forces such as a sense
of tradition, gratitude, healthy self-regard, and meaningful
relationships. These emotional resources help reinforce our commitment
to living virtuously.

The next and more advanced stage of virtue is reached through ongoing
practice, introspection, and philosophical insight. It requires a deeper
internalization of virtue as an essential foundation for a thriving and
harmonious community. At this level, one comes to understand that virtue
is a necessity for the collective good.

This mature understanding reveals a profound truth: virtue is where
empathy and self-preservation find their balance. It is the equilibrium
in which individual needs and communal well-being are harmonized. Within
this balance, the moral questions of life are addressed and shared
understandings are formed. A community grounded in this higher form of
virtue becomes prepared to evolve together, ready to move forward, not
just as individuals, but as a unified whole seeking an even deeper moral
vision.

The path to vice
================

When we are unfortunate enough to grow up without the guidance of a
supportive and nurturing community, we often become shaped by vice
rather than virtue. In such an environment, we begin from a state of
incontinent vice. Although we still possess an innate sense of empathy,
an instinct that urges us to listen to and care for others, we gradually
come to believe that self-preservation takes precedence. In a world that
feels indifferent or hostile, looking out for oneself seems not only
natural but necessary.

As we experience the consequences of our actions and observe how others
respond to our behavior, whether cruel, indifferent, or transactional,
we begin to internalize the belief that putting ourselves first is the
only reliable strategy. Even though we still live among others and can
recognize their emotions, our empathy becomes overshadowed by suspicion
and self-interest. We learn to navigate social norms not to belong, but
to exploit. Blending into society becomes a means of personal gain, not
mutual respect.

In this stage, success in manipulation and self-serving behavior is seen
as cleverness. We may even feel pride in our ability to exploit the
system, and this is often accompanied by feelings of resentment, toward
those who appear virtuous, and toward the community that failed us.
These emotions serve to reinforce our commitment to vice and keep us
anchored in this worldview.

The next stage emerges through the repetition of vicious behavior and
its rationalization. Over time, we begin to view vice not only as
necessary but as justifiable. We construct a worldview in which vice
becomes a form of power, a way to assert our will in a world we perceive
as fundamentally unjust or oppressive. We come to believe that progress
and success belong to those who can outwit, outmaneuver, and exploit
better than others.

In this hardened state, empathy is dismissed as weakness or deception.
We convince ourselves that those who act virtuously are either naive or
manipulative, that their apparent goodness hides ulterior motives. We
find solace in a kind of imaginary community of fellow exploiters,
validating our worldview and reinforcing the belief that the world is
governed not by care, but by cunning.

Thus, the path to vice becomes self-reinforcing: a cycle of mistrust,
rationalized harm, and emotional detachment. And unless something breaks
that cycle—through reflection, suffering, or a new model of community,
the descent continues, pulling us further from the possibility of moral
renewal.

The rise from vice
==================

Even for those who have begun down the path of vice, particularly at the
stages of incontinent and continent vice, redemption remains possible.
The journey is not yet lost. At these stages, we still possess the
capacity for change, we still hear the faint voice of empathy within us,
and the possibility of transformation is real.

At the incontinent stage, our behavior is driven largely by
self-preservation, yet our conscience still whispers to us. What we need
most is to reconnect with a supportive community, one that encourages
understanding, compassion, and moral growth. In such an environment, our
dormant empathy can begin to stir again. We must learn to trust others,
to believe that goodness exists not only in abstract ideals but in the
people around us. This trust is the seed from which virtue can grow.

At the continent stage, we may already be controlling our actions out of
discipline or social necessity, even though our motives remain
self-centered. This stage presents a deeper opportunity: the chance to
listen closely to our empathy and reflect on the emotional messages it
conveys. We must trace these feelings back to their origins, (why do we
feel what we feel?) and open ourselves to the emotional lives of others.
Through honest inquiry, through asking and truly hearing people’s
experiences, we give virtue a chance to take root within us. We begin to
see the humanity in others, and in doing so, reawaken our own.

However, at the stage of fully developed vice, where empathy has been
rejected and vice has been rationalized as truth, the path to redemption
is more difficult and more profound. In this state, only a kind of
personal enlightenment can bring about change. It is not something
imposed from the outside, but something discovered through deep
reflection, meditation, and an earnest exploration of the human
experience. It may come through suffering, through beauty, through love,
or through profound insight, but when it comes, it manifests as a spark
of awareness that reveals the hollowness of vice and the possibility of
a different life.

This spark can reignite the connection between empathy and action,
between the self and the community. And from that point forward, the
rise from vice becomes a new journey forward to wisdom.

The fall from virtue
====================

Even on the path of virtue, we are never beyond the risk of falling.
Particularly at the stages of incontinent and continent virtue,
vigilance is essential. Virtue is not a permanent state but a continual
practice, one that can be shaken by emotion, circumstance, or neglect.

At the incontinent stage, we are aware of what is right and strive
toward it, but we are still vulnerable to moments of weakness. In this
stage, we must be especially wary of the excuses we make for abandoning
virtuous behavior. It becomes tempting to justify our moral lapses by
blaming others, difficult circumstances, or emotional turmoil. These
rationalizations can slowly erode our commitment to virtue, turning
momentary slips into a pattern of vice.

At the continent stage, we have developed greater consistency in
virtuous actions, but our motivations may still be at odds with our
desires. Here, the challenge is to maintain control over the powerful
emotions tied to self-preservation, fear, pride, resentment, that may
try to pull us away from empathy and selflessness. When those instincts
grow strong, we must remain grounded in empathy and remind ourselves of
the deeper reasons behind our moral resolve. Without mindfulness, even
disciplined virtue can begin to decay.

At the stage of true virtue, the risk is not eliminated, ,it becomes
more subtle. The greatest tests often come in the form of tragedy,
betrayal, or deep suffering. These moments can shake our very foundation
and make us question the value or possibility of goodness. Yet it is
precisely in such trials that virtue is refined. If we embrace these
hardships not as failures of justice but as part of the human condition,
our virtue can deepen. We come to see it not as a shield from suffering
but as a way of meeting life with strength, dignity, and compassion.

In every stage, the fall from virtue is possible. Virtue is not
perfection; it is the courageous and humble commitment to keep choosing
the good, even when it is hard.
